ords and actions to the DM and the other players. Drawing on your mental image of your character, you tell everyone what your character does and how he or she does it. For instance, Chris plays Tordek the dwarf. Tordek has a quick temper and blam es the elves of the Cloakwood for his family’s misfortune. At a tavern, an obnoxious elf minstrel sits at Tordek’s table and tries to strike up a conversation with the dwarf. Chris says, “Tordek spits on the floor, growls an insult at the bard, and stomps over to the bar. He sits on a stool and glares at the minstrel before ordering another drink.” In this example, Chris has conveyed Tordek’s m 
ood and given the DM a clear idea of his character’s attitude and actions.



failure, you take 6d6 psychic damage and are insane until you finish a long rest. W hile insane, you can’t take actions, can’t understand what other creatures say, can’t read, and speak only in gibberish. A greater 
restoration spell cast on you ends this effect. On a successful save, you can ask the entity up to five questions. You must ask your questions before the spell ends. The DM answers each question with one word, such 
as “yes,” “no,” “maybe,” “never,” “irrelevant,” or “unclear” (if the entity doesn’t know the answer to the question). If a one-word answer would be misleading, the DM might instead offer a short phrase as an answer. C o n t a g i o n 5th-level necromancy Casting Time: 1 action Range: Touch Component: V, S Duration: 7 days Your touch inflicts disease. Make a melee spell attack against a creature within your reach. On a hit, you afflict the creature with a disease of your choice from any of the ones described below. At the end of each of the target’s turns, it must make a Constitution saving throw. After failing three of these saving throws, the disease’s effects last for the duration, and the creature stops making these saves. After succeeding on three of these saving throws, the creature recovers from the disease, and the spell ends. Since this spell induces a natural disease in its target, any effect that removes a disease or otherwise ameliorates a disease’s effects apply to it. Blinding Sickness. Pain grips the creature’s mind, and its eyes turn milky white. The creature has disadvantage on W isdom checks and W isdom saving throws and is blinded. Filth Fever. A raging fever sw eeps through the creature’s body. The creature has disadvantage on Strength checks, Strength saving throws, and attack rolls that use Strength. Flesh Rot. The creature’s flesh decays. The creature has disadvantage on Charisma checks and vulnerability to all damage. Mindfire. The creature’s mind becom es feverish. The creature has disadvantage on Intelligence checks and Intelligence saving throws, and the creature behaves as if under the effects of the confusion spell during combat. Seizure. The creature is overcom e with shaking. The creature has disadvantage on Dexterity checks, Dexterity saving throws, and attack rolls that use Dexterity. Slimy Doom. The creature begins to bleed uncontrollably. The creature has disadvantage 
on Constitution checks and Constitution saving throws. In addition, whenever the creature takes damage, it is stunned until the end of its next turn. C o n t i n g e n c y 6 th-level evocation Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a statuette of yourself carved from ivory and decorated with gems worth at least 1,500 gp) Duration: 10 days Choose a spell of 5th level or lower that you can cast, that has a casting time of 1 action, and that can target you. You cast that spell—called the contingent spell—as part of casting contingency, expending spell slots for both, but the contingent spell doesn't com e into effect. Instead, it takes effect when a certain circumstance occurs. You describe that circumstance when you cast the two spells. For example, a contingency cast with water breathing might stipulate that water breathing com es into effect when you are engulfed in water or a similar liquid. The contingent spell takes effect immediately after the circumstance is met for the first time, whether or not you want it to. and then contingency ends. The contingent spell takes effect only on you, even if it can normally target others. You can use



d e W hen you take the Hide action, you make a Dexterity (Stealth) check in an attempt to hide, following the rules in chapter 7 for hiding. If you succeed, you gain certain benefits, as described in the “Unseen Attackers and Targets” section later in this chapter. M a k i n g a n A t t a c k Im p r o v i s i n g a n A c t i o n Your character can do things not covered by the actions in this chapter, such as breaking down doors, intimidating enemies, sensing weaknesses in magical defenses, or calling for a parley with a foe. The only limits to the actions you can attempt are your imagination and your character’s ability scores. See the descriptions of the ability scores in chapter 7 for inspiration as you improvise. When you describe an action not detailed elsewhere in the rules, the DM tells you whether that action is possible and what kind of roll you need to make, if any, to determine success or failure. R e a d y S e a r c h W hen you take the Search action, you devote your attention to finding something. Depending on the nature of your search, the DM might have you make a W isdom (Perception) check or an Intelligence (Investigation) check. U s e a n O b j e c t You normally interact with an object while doing som ething else, such as when you draw a sword as part of an attack. W hen an object requires your action for its use, you take the Use an Object action. This action is also useful when you want to interact with m ore than one object on your turn. W hether you’re striking with a melee weapon, firing a w eapon at range, or making an attack roll as part of a spell, an attack has a simple structure. Som etim es you want to get the jum p on a foe or wait for a particular circum stance 
before you act. To do so, you can take the Ready action on your turn so that you can act later in the round using your reaction. First, you decide what perceivable circum stance will trigger your reaction. Then, you choose the action you will take in response to that trigger, or you choose to move up to your speed in response to it. Examples include “If the cultist steps on the trapdoor, I’ll pull the lever that opens it,” and “If the goblin steps next to me, I move away.” W hen the trigger occurs, you can either take your reaction right after the trigger finishes or ignore the trigger. Rem em ber that you can take only one reaction per 
round. W hen you ready a spell, you cast it as normal but hold its energy, which you release with your reaction when the trigger occurs. To be readied, a spell must have a casting time of 1 action, and holding onto 
the spell’s magic requires concentration (explained in chapter 10). If your concentration is broken, the spell dissipates without taking effect. For example, if you are concentrating on the web spell and ready magic missile, your web spell ends, and if you take damage before you release magic missile with your reaction, your concentration might be broken.



have a special tag: ritual. Such a spell can be cast following the norm al rules for spellcasting, or the spell can be cast as a ritual. The ritual version of a spell takes 10 minutes longer to cast than normal. It 
also doesn’t expend a spell slot, which m eans the ritual version of a spell can’t be cast at a higher level. To cast a spell as a ritual, a spellcaster must have a feature that grants the ability to do so. The cleric and the druid, for example, have such a feature. The caster must also have the spell prepared or on his or her list of spells known, unless the character’s ritual feature specifies otherwise, as the wizard’s does. C a s t i n g a Spell W hen a character casts any spell, the sam e basic rules are followed, regardless of the character’s class or the spell’s effects. Each spell description in chapter 11 begins with a block of 
information, including the spell’s name, level, school of magic, casting time, range, components, and duration. The rest of a spell entry describes the spell’s effect. C a s t i n g T i m e Most spells require a single action to cast, but som e spells require a bonus action, a reaction, or much more time to cast. B o n u s A c t i o n A spell cast with a bonus action is especially swift. You must use a bonus action on your turn to cast the spell, provided that you haven’t already taken a bonus action this turn. You can’t cast another spell during the same turn, except for a cantrip with a casting time of 1 action. R e a c t i o n s Som e spells can be cast as reactions. These spells take a fraction of a second to bring about and are cast in response to som e event. If a spell can be cast as a reaction, the spell description tells you exactly when you can do so. L o n g e r C a s t i n g T im e s Certain spells (including spells cast as rituals) require m ore time to cast: minutes or even hours. W hen you cast a spell with a casting time longer than a single action or reaction, you must spend your action each turn casting the spell, and you must maintain your concentration while you do so (see “Concentration” below). If your concentration is broken, the spell fails, but 
you don’t expend a spell slot. If you want to try casting the spell again, you must start over. R a n g e The target of a spell must be within the spell’s range. For a spell like magic missile, the target is a creature. For a spell like fireball, the target is the point in space where the ball of fire erupts. M ost spells have ranges expressed in feet. Som e spells can target only a creature (including you) that you touch. Other spells, such as the shield spell, affect only you. These spells have a range of self. Spells that create cones or lines of effect that originate from you also have a range o f self, indicating that the origin point of the spell’s effect must be you (see “Areas o f Effect” later in the this chapter).